
                      Z-Machine Standard 1.1 Proposal
                      -------------------------------

                   Authors: Kevin Bracey & Jason C. Penney

                                INTRODUCTION
                                ============

This revision of the Z-Machine Standards Document has been written with
the following aims:

   1) To clarify problem areas in Standard 1.0, and correct errors
   2) To allow more probing of interpreter capabilities
   3) To clarify the use of Blorb with Standard 1.0
   4) To add some extensions for use with Blorb
   5) To add some simple extensions to the Version 5 and Version 6
      screen models to increase flexibility
   6) To allow easier access to arbitrary Unicode characters

As ever, interpreters *FULLY* implementing this Standard (apart from any
optional parts whose absence are signalled through header bits) for a given
Version should indicate this by setting the Standard revision bytes in the
header to $01 $01. (An interpreter might meet the Standard for all Versions
other than V6, in which case it would not fill in the revision bytes when
playing a V6 game).

There have been instances in the past of interpreters that do not fully meet
Standard 1.0 claiming Standard 1.0 compliance in the header. This sort of
behaviour is dangerous, and likely to cause games that would otherwise work
to break.

Conversely, games that absolutely require Standard 1.1 features should not
refuse outright to run on a non-Standard 1.1 interpreter - it may be
implementing the new features you require, being deficient only in other
areas. Instead, a warning should be issued to the user before proceeding.
Of course, whereever possible games should have alternative behaviour
automatically invoked for older interpreters.

As with the rest of the Standard, all references to Version 5 in this
document apply equally to Versions 7 and 8.



                          UPDATES/CLARIFICATIONS
                          ======================

Memory layout
-------------
Version 6 and 7 story files are both limited to 512K, not 320K. The 320K
limitation was an artificial one imposed by the Inform compiler - this has
now been addressed by a compiler patch.


Character set
-------------
In the past, not just in the Z-machine world, there has been general
confusion over the rendering of ASCII/ZSCII/Latin-1/Unicode characters $27
and $60. For the Z-machine, the traditional interpretations of
right-single-quote/apostrophe and left-single-quote are preferred over the
modern neutral-single-quote and grave accent - see Table 2A of the Inform
Designer's Manual. $22 is a neutral double-quote.

An alternative rendering is to interpret both $27 and $60 as neutral quotes,
but interpreting $60 as a grave accent is to be avoided.

No doubt aware of this confusion, Infocom never used character $60, and used
$27 almost exclusively as an apostrophe - hardly any single quotes appear in
Infocom games. Modern authors would do well to follow their lead.

The few Infocom games that do use single quotes use $27 for both opening and
closing - but even on many of their interpreters this looked a little odd, so
suggesting that $27 be a right quote introduces no extra compatibility
problems.

* Notes on smartening output

Interpreters can easily convert $22 into opening and closing double quotes
automatically if they desire. Adjustment of $27 and $60 is ill-advised, due
to the difficulty in distinguishing single-quotes from apostrophes - witness
the following examples from various Infocom games:

    "I'm Wiggins, 'ead o' the Baker Street Irregulars."
    ... a majority of people agree our school system is 'out of control.'"
    ... agreed that 2051, '61, and '71 all looked disturbing. ...
    [Too bad there's no scratch 'n' sniff for this one, huh?]
    The word 'examne' isn't in your vocabulary.

Thus if authors want to have smart single quotes, it is up to them to
correctly use opening ($60) and closing ($27) forms.

One possible heuristic for an interpreter to elegantly handle both types of
quoting would be to initially treat $27 as a neutral quote, except when
occurring between two letters, when it is clearly an apostrophe. As soon as a
$60 is printed, it is clear that the game is intending to use smart quotes,
so $27 from then on should always be a right quote.

There is a similar problem with character $2D, which could be hyphen, minus
or a dash. When proportional fonts are used these forms should look very
different, so $2D is a candidate for interpreter smartening. By default it
should be assumed to be a hyphen, but conventional forms worth spotting are
" - " to represent an en-dash and " -- " to represent an em-dash, although
such smartening mustn't be applied when the game has requested fixed-pitch.
"-" immediately preceding a digit could be converted to a minus.


Encoded text
------------
In Version 3 and later, many of Infocom's interpreters (and some subsequent
interpreters, such as ITF's) treat two consecutive Z-characters 4 or 5 as
shift locks, contrary to the Standard. As a result, story files should not
use multiple consecutive 4 or 5 codes except for padding at the end of
strings and dictionary words. In any case, these shift locks are not used in
dictionary words, or any of Infocom's story files.

Two extra rules apply to encoding text for dictionary words in Versions 1 and
2 only (see 3.7). If the truncation to 6 Z-characters leaves a multi-
Z-character construction incomplete, the end-bit of the last word is not set.
Also, shift-lock Z-characters 4 and 5 should be used instead of the
single-shift Z-characters 2 and 3 when the next two characters come from the
same alphabet. These two rules affect the dictionary of Zork I, which
contains "nasty-" (looking), "storm-" (tossed) and "pdp10". Arguably, the
first rule could be a bug, but the 3 extant V1 and V2 files are consistent.
The games are still winnable without access to those dictionary words.


Unicode
-------
The Z-machine is not expected to handle complex Unicode formatting like
combining characters, bidirectional formatting and unusual line-wrapping
rules - it remains firmly based in the world of left-to-right text with space
breaks between words - every character is viewed as separate spacing glyph.

All output is in presentation order, from left to right. To handle languages
like Arabic or Hebrew, text would have to be output "visually", with manual
line breaks (possibly via an in-game formatting engine).

Far eastern languages are generally straightforward, except they usually use
no spaces, and line wraps can occur almost anywhere. The easiest to way to
handle this would be for the game to turn off buffering. A more sophisticated
game might include its own formatting engine. Also, fixed-space output is
liable to be problematical with most Far Eastern fonts, which use a mixture
of "full width" and "half width" forms - all half-width characters would have
to be forced to full width.

The only way to output arbitrary Unicode characters in Standard 1.0 is one
character at a time with the @print_unicode opcode. Standard 1.1 adds Unicode
string printing - see below.
   
The Z-machine does not provide access to non-BMP characters (ie characters
outside the range U+0000 to U+FFFF).

Unicode characters U+0000 to U+001F and U+007F to U+009F are control codes,
and must not be used.


Header capabilities bits
------------------------
The (Version 6) sound and graphics bits in Flags 1 indicate general
availability of sound and graphics - ie whether the associated opcodes are
available and functional.

The bits in Flags 2 and 3 should ideally be set reflecting current
availability, rather than general support. In other words, if no Blorb (or
other) resources for this story file have been found, or if the Blorb file
contains no graphics or no sound, the corresponding bits should be cleared.

Also, it is recommended that interpreters that would prompt for an auxiliary
Blorb file should do so immediately on start up if any of the "game wants to
use sound/music/graphics" bits are set; this allows the bits to be cleared if
no file is forthcoming, before the game starts execution. The game can then
take appropriate action.

Bit 4 of Flags 1 indicates the availability of the fixed-pitch style, not
Font 4.


The fixed-pitch header bit
--------------------------
Use of the fixed-pitch bit in the header is deprecated in Version 5 and
later - it is an irregularity in the Z-machine that complicates the
implementation of buffering and text style handling in the interpreter, and
may even slow down all memory stores.

Font 4 (or Fixed Pitch style) should be used instead. Infocom did not use the
fixed-pitch bit after Version 4, and it is not implemented in at least some
of their later interpreters.

However, the fixed-pitch bit is modified by the "font" statement in
Inform 6.21, so is used by many current Inform generated files. Therefore
interpreter authors must support it in Version 5. Support in Version 6 is not
required.


Indirect variable references
----------------------------
In the seven opcodes that take indirect variable references (inc, dec,
inc_chk, dec_chk, load, store, pull), an indirect reference to the stack
pointer does not push or pull the top item of the stack - it is read
or written in place.


@art_shift and @log_shift
-------------------------
The "places" operand must be in the range -15 to +15, otherwise behaviour
is undefined.


Version 6 windows
-----------------
Interpreter authors are advised that all 8 windows in Version 6 must be
treated identically. The only ways in which they are distinguished are:

   * Different default positions + sizes
   * Different default attributes
   * @split_window manipulates windows 0 and 1 specifically
   * Window 1 is the default mouse window

Differences in interpreter behaviour should only arise from differences in
window attributes and properties.


@set_text_style
---------------
It was previously unclear in the Standard whether instructions like 

   @set_text_style 5;   ! Reverse+Italic

were legal. None of Infocom's game files make use of such forms, and many
interpreters will not handle them correctly. Such instructions should be
avoided; instead you can use multiple @set_text_style opcodes specifying each
style in turn, with the most important last, thus:

   @set_text_style 4;   ! Italic
   @set_text_style 1;   ! Reverse - overrides if combination not available

However, Standard 1.1 does now require such combinations in a single
opcode to be supported, as they are in some of Infocom's later
interpreters - see below. But unless a game absolutely requires
Standard 1.1 anyway (eg for true colour support), it is probably best
to request only one style per opcode for backwards compatibility.


@set_font
---------
Font 2 (the picture font) is undefined. No Standard interpreter should
implement it, and set_font 2 should always return 0. Any new fonts will have
numbers higher than 4. Fonts 5-1023 are reserved for future Standards to
specify. Local use may be made of higher font numbers.


@get_prop_len
-------------
@get_prop_len 0 should return 0. This is required by some Infocom games and
files generated by old versions of Inform.


@set_cursor
-----------
S8.7.2.3 states that it is illegal to move the cursor outside the current
size of the upper window. S8.8.3.5 gives the equivalent rule for Version 6.

Many modern games have been lax in obeying this rule; in particular some
of the standard Inform menu libraries have violated it. Infocom's Sherlock
also miscalculated the size of the upper window to use for box quotes.

It is recommended that if the cursor is moved below the split position in
V4/V5, interpreters should execute an implicit "split_window" to contain the
requested cursor position, if possible. Diagnostics should be produced, but
should be suppressable.

In V6, it is legal to position the cursor up against the right or bottom of a
window - eg at (1,1) in a zero-sized window or at (641,401) in 640x400
window. Indeed, this is the default state of windows 1 to 7, and the cursor
may be left at the right-hand side of a window when wrapping is off.

Attempting to print text (including new-lines) when the cursor is fewer than
font_height units from the bottom of the window results in undefined
behaviour - this precludes any printing in windows less than font_height
units high.


@split_window
-------------
In Version 6, the Standard states that the cursor remains in the same
absolute position. This is an extension to the Z-machine, as this rule is not
followed by Infocom's own interpreters, which keep the same window-relative
position. The Standard behaviour more closely mimics Version 5's
split_window.

The opcode dictionary incorrectly states that "the width and x-coordinates of
windows 0 and 1 are not altered." The correct behaviour is detailed in
S8.8.4.1.


@output_stream
--------------
Interpreter authors are reminded that "nested" uses of @output_stream 3
have been required since Standard 1.0; see S7.1.2.1.1.


@read_mouse
-----------
@read_mouse should be realtime.  When called it should read the current mouse
location, whether or not the mouse is inside the current mouse window. Most
modern interpreters get this wrong, but Infocom's interpreters behave this
way. Interpreters are allowed to show positions and button states outside the
Z-machine screen if the pointer is outside the interpreter's own user
interface (using negative values if needed). 

Programs should be prepared to cope with this. For example in a painting
program you might want to ignore all buttons down outside the screen. When
dragging something you might want to keep trying to follow the pointer, even
outside the screen, until the buttons are released. 

Interpreters may constrain the pointer to the screen as long as buttons are
held down - this might aid dragging operations - although this is not
required.

Previous revisions of the Standard stated that mouse buttons were numbered in
the following fashion: "low bits on the right of the mouse, rising as one
looks left".  This is a rather non-portable implementation and should be
abandoned in modern interpreters in favour of the "primary" button being the
lowest bit, the "secondary" (if present) being the next lowest bit, etc. The
ordering of buttons should be that which is most natural for the host system.


@picture_data
-------------
@picture_data 0 should branch if any pictures are available.


@sound_effect
-------------
To clarify:

    @sound_effect number 3/4

will stop (and optionally unload) sound "number" if it is currently playing
(or loaded). Otherwise it is ignored.

    @sound_effect 0 3/4

will stop (and unload) all sounds - music and effects.

The "repeats" parameter in Version 5 indicates the total number of times to
play the sound, not the number of times to repeat it after the first play.
Setting repeats to zero in V5 is illegal - it is suggested that interpreters
treat this as a request to play the sound once, and maybe issue a warning.

Callback routines are only called when the sound has played the requested
number of times. If manually stopped or interrupted by another sound, the
routine is not called.

The Blorb specification effectively revised Standard 1.0, as follows:

"Sound" is split into two classes - "music" (eg Blorb SONG and MOD) and
"effects" (eg Infocom .SND or Blorb AIFF).

The "sound requested" header bit is left set if the interpreter supports
either effects or music. It is only cleared if the interpreter can provide
neither effects nor music.

Music and effects are treated as two separate channels. Playing a new effect
interrupts the current effect, but not the music, and vice versa. Whether
loading a new sound (with @sound_effect n 1) stops the current one is
implementation defined.

As of Standard 1.1, there is a header bit to indicate that the game wants to
use multiple sound channels and the interpreter can handle it, and a bit
to indicate the availability of music.


Volume guidelines
-----------------
[ This would better live in the Blorb specification, but is partly
  Z-machine specific. ]

When using Blorb resources, the default interpreter behaviour (unless over-
ridden by the player) should be for samples played at maximum volume (64), in
one channel of a SONG or MOD played at volume 8, to be of equal volume to
samples played at maximum volume (8) as an effect. This will be the natural
behaviour if effects use one physical channel and MODs/SONGs use four
physical channels.

Ideally, a sound played at volume <n> in a SONG played at volume <m> should
sound the same as when played as an effect at volume <n*m/64>. This mandates
that the volume scale for effects be equivalent to the scale defined for
samples in the MOD specification.

If multi-channel effects are used, the overall volume should be independent
of the number of channels used in the sound. Thus a stereo AIFF containing
the same samples for left and right should sound as loud as a mono AIFF
containing the same data. This will need adjustment of volume if stereo AIFFs
use two physical channels and mono AIFFs use one. No adjustment would be
required if an interpreter reduced all AIFFs to mono.


Colour numbers
--------------
The presence of the "under the cursor" colour option, and in Standard 1.1
the set_true_colour opcode (see below), raises the possibility of
non-standard colour numbers appearing in window property 11. In addition, an
interpreter may offer non-standard default colours, which need to appear in
the story file header. We now give more detailed implementation guidelines.

If a true colour, or an "under the cursor" colour, has been requested by the
game, then the foreground or background colour shown in window property 11 is
implementation defined, except that:

      1) If the colour selected was one of the standard set (2-15), then
         that colour should be indicated in property 11.
      2) If the colour selected was not one of the standard set, the colour
         shown in property 11 should be >= 16.

It is legal for interpreters to always show the same value in property 11 if
a true or sampled colour is in use. As a result, story files cannot assume
that setting a value that was read from property 11 will give the same
colour, if @set_true_colour or @set_colour -1 has been used in that window.

The same rules apply if an interpreter offers non-standard default colours
(which need to be shown in the header) although in this case it would be
ill-advised to show the same colour numbers for foreground and background -
unless they can be distinguished, non-standard default colours should
probably not be offered.

If the interpreter offers a limited palette, then there is no problem, as it
can be arranged for there to be fewer than 240 distinct non-standard colours.
In an interpreter with a higher colour-depth, a good implementation would be
to use colours 16-255 to represent the last 240 distinct non-standard colours
used, re-using numbers after 240 colours have been used. This will minimize
potential problems caused by non-standard colours, particularly when set as
defaults. 

Regardless of the limitations on colour numbers, in Version 6 each window
must remember accurately the colour pair selected, so it is preserved across
window switches.


                                ADDITIONS
                                =========

Blorb
-----
Standard 1.1 interpreters are required to handle Blorb (v1.1) files, at least
up to support for running a Z-code executable from within a Blorb file. If
the interpreter supports sound or graphics, it must be able to obtain those
resources from a Blorb file (although the Standard does not preclude other
formats).


Header Extension
----------------
If the interpreter claims Standard 1.1 compliance then it supports the
following extra words in the header extension table. If the header extension
table is present, and the extra words are present, then a Standard 1.1
interpreter will examine and update them.

If the interpreter is not Standard 1.1, then the extra words will be ignored.
Guidelines on behaviour in this case are supplied in the descriptions below.

Note that the header extension table itself is a Version 5 feature, so the
extra information here is not available in earlier Versions, despite the
fact that some fields could be applicable.

The new flags are placed in a new word, rather than in Flags 2, to minimize
potential compatibility problems. To prevent future compatibility problems,
all reserved bits in the Flags 3 word MUST be cleared by the interpreter.

Word  V  Dyn Int Rst  Contents
---- --- --- --- ---  --------------------------------
 4    5               Flags 3:
      5       *   *   0: All text style combinations available?
      5       *   *   1: Multiple colours available?
      5       *   *   8: If set, game wants to use music
      5       *   *   9: If set, game wants multiple sound channels
      6       *   *   10: If set, game wants to use transparency
                      (For bits 8-10, Int clears again if it cannot provide
                       the requested effect).
 5    5       *   *   True default foreground colour
 6    5       *   *   True default background colour


0: All text style combinations available?

         An interpreter sets or clears this bit to indicate whether
         it can provide all the text styles it supports in all
         combinations.  If it can do Bold, Italic or Fixed, but not
         Bold and Fixed at the same time this bit should be 0.  If it
         doesn't support Italic at all (and has cleared Flags 1 bit 3
         to specify this), but it does support combinations of the
         remaining three styles it should set this bit to 1.

         All combinations are required for font 1. Font 3 only requires
         Roman and Reverse Video. Font 4 requires all combinations, except
         that Fixed is ignored (because it is inherently fixed-pitch).

         If the interpreter predates Standard 1.1, then text style
         combinations may or may not be available; however until
         Standard 1.1 interpreters were not required to handle
         combinations of styles in a single @set_text_style call.
         Combination effects should therefore be requested using
         sequential calls (with the most important effect requested
         last).

1: Multiple colours available?

         This bit should be 1 if the interpreter can display multiple
         text colours on screen at one time, and should be 0 if
         changing the text colour changes all text on screen.

         Preferred behaviour for Standard interpreters is to display
         multiple colours. But if the interpreter predates Standard 1.1,
         then generally its behaviour will depend on the machine type -
         see section 8.3. If this flags word is present, then a Standard
         interpreter should normally set the bit, and provide multiple
         colours if at all possible, regardless of machine type.

8: If set, game wants to use music

        A game file that wishes to use music will set this bit.  If an
        interpreter can provide music (as described in the Blorb
        specification) it should leave the bit set; if it is unable
        to do this, it should clear the bit.  If this bit is set then
        a minimum of two sound channels exist, one for effects and one
        for music.

        If this flags word is not present, or the interpreter predates
        Standard 1.1, then there is no way to tell whether music is
        available. If an interpreter doesn't support music, then
        @sound_effect opcodes requesting music will be ignored.

        If a game that supplies this flags word does not set this bit,
        then the interpreter may choose to act as though music were
        unsupported.

9: If set, game wants multiple sound channels
 
        If the game wishes to have multiple sound channels, it
        should set this bit. This changes the behaviour of @sound_effect.
        An interpreter should clear this bit if it can't play more than one
        sound of a given type a time.

        Interpreters predating standard 1.1 will not support multiple
        sound channels, and will act as though this bit is clear.

        The minimum requirement on an interpreter that sets this bit is
        that it can play at least two mono effects and one (4-channel)
        piece of music simultaneously. More channels may be available (see
        @sound_effect section below for details).

10: If set, game wants to use transparency

        In Version 6 colour 15 is defined as transparent.  If an
        interpreter cannot provide transparency then it should clear
        this bit.

        Transparency is a new feature in Standard 1.1. Older interpreters
        will not support this.

All other bits in the flags word must be cleared by the interpreter.


Unicode in strings
------------------
In Standard 1.1, for Version 5 and later, a new mechanism for storing Unicode
text in standard Z-machine strings is defined - the @print_unicode opcode in
Standard 1.0 is not adequate to straightforwardly handle, say, a
Japanese-language game, which would require widescale use of non-ZSCII
characters.

When encountered in Z-machine text, ZSCII characters 768-1023 are "Unicode
escapes", which indicate that Unicode data follows.  The number of Unicode
codepoints to follow is given by the ZSCII code minus 767.

After reading a Unicode escape, the Z-machine starts reading Unicode at the
next word. Once the designated number of Unicode characters have been read,
text decoding resumes where it left off in the word where the Unicode escape
was found. Once that word has been processed, the next word is read from
after the Unicode sequence, unless the end-bit was set. This ordering will
arise naturally from typical decoder implementations, so is easier to decode
than to explain.

The Unicode text is stored as a series of words, inverted to prevent casual
browsing.

This would be a typical usage:

  "Japanese" in Japanese: (U+65E5 U+672C U+8A9E)
  Z-characters: 5,6,24, 2,5,5, <Unicode>, <Unicode>, <Unicode>
  Encoded:  $10DC $88A5 $D15F $98D3 $75D1

The following examples demonstrate ordering:

  "Zork<TM>" (<TM> = U+2122)
  Z-characters: 4,31,20, 23,16,5, 6,24,0, <Unicode>
  Encoded: $13F4 $5E05 $9B00 $DEDD

  "Zor<TM>k"
  Z-characters: 4,31,20, 23,5,6, 24,0,16, <Unicode>
  Encoded: $13F4 $5CA6 $E010 $DEDD

  "Zo<TM>rk"
  Z-characters: 4,31,20, 5,6,24, 0,23,16, <Unicode>
  Encoded: $13F4 $14D8 $82F0 $DEDD

  "Z<TM>ork"
  Z-characters: 4,31,5, 6,24,0, <Unicode>, 20,23,16
  Encoded: $13E5 $1B00 $DEDD $D2F0

[Occasional characters like that <TM> should normally be output using
print_unicode (with a Standard interpreter check) for backwards
compatibility.]

ZSCII characters 768-1023 can only be encoded as a 4 Z-character sequence,
leading to a basic overhead of 4 bytes on all pure Unicode strings.

Unicode escapes can only be used in strings, not @print_char, and are not
used when tokenising text.


@xor
----
2OP:29 1D 1/* xor a b -> (result)

Bitwise EXCLUSIVE OR.

*** This opcode is new in Standard 1.1. On older interpreters it can be
simulated with the following code sequence:

   @not b -> sp;
   @and a sp -> sp;
   @not a -> sp;
   @and sp b -> sp;
   @or sp sp -> result;

Because it can be simulated relatively straightforwardly with other opcodes,
this opcode should be avoided unless a story file requires Standard 1.1
anyway.


@save and @restore
------------------
EXT:0 0 5/* save table bytes name prompt -> (result)
EXT:1 1 5/* restore table bytes name prompt -> (result)

As of Standard 1.1 an additional optional parameter, prompt, is allowed on
Version 5 extended save/restore.  This allows a game author to tell the
interpreter whether it should ask for confirmation of the provided file name
(prompt=1), or just silently save/restore using the provided filename
(prompt=0).

If the parameter is not provided, whether to prompt or not is a matter for
the interpreter - this might be globally user-configurable. Infocom's
interpreters do prompt for filenames, many modern ones do not.


@buffer_screen
--------------
New opcode in Standard 1.1, for Version 6

EXT:29 1D 6/* buffer_screen mode -> (result)

Interpreters may use a backing store to store the Z-machine screen state,
rather than plotting directly to the screen. This would normally be the case
in a windowed operating system environment. If a backing store is in use,
display changes executed by the Z-machine may not be immediately made visible
to the user. Standard 1.1 adds the new opcode @buffer_screen to Version 6 to
control screen updates. An interpreter is free to ignore the opcode if it
doesn't fit its display model (in which case it must act as if buffer_screen
is always set to 0).
  
When buffer_screen is set to 0 (the default), all display changes are
expected to become visible to the user either immediately, or within a short
period of time, at the interpreter's discretion. At a minimum, all updates
become visible before waiting for input. Any intermediate display states
between input requests may not be seen; for example when printing a large
amount of new text into a scrolling window, all the intermediate scroll
positions may or may not be shown.
  
When buffer_screen is set to 1, the interpreter need not change the visible
display at all. Any display changes can be done purely in the backing store.
A program may set buffer_screen to 1 before carrying out a complex layered
graphical composition, to indicate that the intermediate states are not worth
showing. When buffer_mode is set back to 0, the display is not necessarily
updated immediately - if this is required, buffer_mode -1 should be issued as
well. It would be extremely ill-advised to prompt for input with
@buffer_screen set to 1.
  
With buffer_screen in either state, an update of the visible display can be
forced immediately by issuing @buffer_screen -1, without altering the current
buffering state. Note that @buffer_screen -1 does NOT flush the text buffer.
  
@buffer_screen returns the old buffer_screen state.


@set_text_style
---------------
As of Standard 1.1, it is legal to request style combinations in a
single @set_text_style opcode by adding the values (which are powers of two)
together. If the parameter is non-zero, then all the styles given are
activated. If the parameter is zero, then all styles are deactivated.

If the "All text style combinations available?" bit is set in the header
extension, then the interpreter is required to display a combination of all
styles requested that it provides (i.e. if the interpreter can't display
italic but a game file requests style 12 [Italic + Fixed] anyway, the
interpreter would activate the Fixed style).  If the "Full font style
combinations available" bit is not set, then the Interpreter should give
precedence first to the most recent call to @set_text_style, and within that
to the highest bit, making the priority Fixed, Italic, Bold, Reverse. 


@set_font
---------
EXT:4 4 6/- set_font font window -> (result)

In Version 6, set_font has an optional window parameter, as for set_colour.
This was part of the original Infocom design, but omitted by earlier
Standards. It is reinstated here, as it is useful to be able to measure
a font that is about to be used in another window, so that window can be
sized before attempting to place the cursor in it.


@set_colour
-----------
In Version 6 only, colour 15 is defined as transparent.  This is only valid
as a background colour; an attempt to select it for the foreground should
produce a diagnostic. Interpreters not supporting transparency should ignore
any attempt to select colour 15.

If the current background colour is transparent, then printed text should be
superimposed on the current window contents, without filling the background
behind the text. @erase_window, @erase_line and @erase_picture become null
operations.

The intent is to make it possible to superimpose text on non-uniform images.
Up until now, only uniform images could be satisfactorily written on
by sampling the background colour - that in itself would be problematical if
the interpreter used dithering.

Scrolling with the background set to transparent is not permitted, so
transparent should only be requested in a non-scrolling window. It is not
valid to use Reverse Video style with the background set to transparent.

Instructions that prompt for user input, such as @read and @save, should be
avoided when the background is set to transparent, as it will not generally
be possible for text entry to take place satisfactorily in the absence of
a defined background colour.

Printing text multiple times on top itself with the background set to
transparent should be avoided, as the interpreter may use anti-aliasing,
resulting in the text getting progressively heavier.

Standard 1.1 interpreters should provide the following basic colour
set, regardless of machine type, in both Version 5 and Version 6:

 -1 = sample      (true -3) [V6 only]
  0 = current     (true -2)
  1 = default     (true -1)
  2 = black       (true $0000, $$0000000000000000)
  3 = red         (true $001F, $$0000000000011111)
  4 = green       (true $03E0, $$0000001111100000)
  5 = yellow      (true $03FF, $$0000001111111111)
  6 = blue        (true $7C00, $$0111110000000000)
  7 = magenta     (true $7C1F, $$0111110000011111)
  8 = cyan        (true $7FE0, $$0111111111100000)
  9 = white       (true $7FFF, $$0111111111111111)
 10 = light grey  (true $5AD6, $$0101101011010110)
 11 = medium grey (true $4631, $$0100011000110001)
 12 = dark grey   (true $2D6B, $$0010110101101011)
 13  reserved
 14  reserved
 15 = transparent (true -4) [V6 only]

This is the original Amiga Version 6 colour set. The greys are gamma adjusted
from the original values (8-bit &AA,&77,&44) used on the Amiga, on the
assumption that the Amiga's system gamma is 1/1.8.

The equivalences between the colour numbers and true colours are canonical -
this gives an exact equivalence mapping from @set_colour to @set_true_colour.

Interpreters may provide different colours (eg making colour 10 dark grey),
but if and only if they can detect they are running an original Infocom story
file.


@set_true_colour
----------------
New opcode in Standard 1.1, for Version 5 or later, if Flags 1 bit 0 is set.

EXT:13 D 5/* @set_true_colour foreground background
         6/* @set_true_colour foreground background window

fg and bg are 15-bit colour values - bit 15 = 0
                                     bits 14-10 blue
                                     bits 9-5 green
                                     bits 4-0 red

Magic values in the opcode are: (-1) = default setting
                                (-2) = current setting
                                (-3) = colour under cursor (V6 only)
                                (-4) = transparent (V6 only)

The interpreter should set the closest approximations available to
the requested colours. In V6, the interpreter may store the approximations
in window properties 16 and 17, so the program can tell how close it got
(although it is acceptable for the interpreter to just store the requested
value).

In the minimal implementation, interpreters just need to match to the closest
of the standard colours and internally call @set_colour (although that would
have to ensure window properties 16 and 17 were updated). In a full
implementation this would be turned around and @set_colour would internally
call @set_true_colour.

The default true colours are stored in the header extension table.

The optional window parameter is only allowed in V6, and operates the same as
in @set_colour.

True colour specifications are in the sRGB colour space, $0000 being black
and $7FFF being white. Colours should be gamma adjusted if necessary. See the
PNG specification for a good introduction to colour spaces and gamma
correction.


@get_wind_prop
--------------
With the addition of true colours, two new Version 6 window properties are
defined.

The two new window properties are:

   16: true foreground colour
   17: true background colour

These are not writable with @put_wind_prop.

The true foreground and background colours show the actual colour being
used for the foreground and background, whether it was set using @set_colour
or @set_true_colour. Transparent is indicated as -4. If the colour was
sampled from a picture then the value shown may be a 15-bit rounding of a
more precise colour, leading to a slight inaccuracy if the colour is read
and then written back.


@sound_data
-----------
New opcode in Standard 1.1, for Version 5 or later. 

EXT:14 E 5/* sound_data sound-number array ?(label)

Asks the interpreter for data on the sound with the given number. If the
sound number is valid, and the sound is of a type supported by the
intepreter, a branch occurs and information is written to the
array: the type (1 for effect, 2 for music) in word 0, playing
status in word 1, and channel availability in word 2. (This is an array, not
a "table" with initial size information.) 

Otherwise, if the sound number is zero, the interpreter writes the number of
available (and supported) sounds into word 0 of the array and the release
number of the sounds file (eg from the Blorb RelN chunk) into word 1. A
branch occurs if the number of sounds is non-zero.

Otherwise, nothing happens.

The playing status is -1 if the sound is not currently playing. If the sound
is currently playing, the playing status is the length of time that the
sound has been playing, in tenths of a second, clamped to a maximum of 3276.7
seconds. If the sound is playing on multiple channels, it is the longest
running channel's playing time that is indicated.

The channel availability word is set to 0 if playing the sound will not
result in any other sounds being stopped. Otherwise the availability word
contains the number of a sound that will be interrupted by playing this
sound.

This opcode must be provided even if sound isn't supported (in which case it
would always do nothing).


@sound_effect
-------------
Standard 1.1 adds new behaviour to @sound_effect (but see the clarifications
section above for notes on pre-1.1 behaviour).

As of Standard 1.1, there is a header bit to indicate that the game wants to
use multiple sound channels and the interpreter can handle it.

If the multiple sound channels bit is clear (or not present), then the
interpreter behaves as per Standard 1.0 + Blorb 1.1 - see above for
clarifications.

If the multiple sound channels bit is set, then the interpreter should not
stop any current sound when a new one is played or loaded - it should only
stop a sound when explicitly asked to, or when it has played the specified
number of repeats. That way, a game can play multiple sounds of the same type
at once. 

However, there are an undefined number of sound channels available. When an
interpreter runs out of channels of a particular type, and an additional call
to @sound_effect is made, the sound with the highest resource number of the
same type is stopped (without its callback routine being called) and the new
sound is played. It may be that playing a sound interrupts more than one
sound - for example a stereo effect could interrupt two mono effects.

Sounds of different types can never interrupt each other - the channels used
for music and effects are independent. As a corollary to this, it may be that
more effects channels are available if the game does not ask to use music.

The highest resource number rule allows an author to indicate the
"importance" of each sound.

The same sound can be played on more than one channel, with different volumes,
repeats and callback routines. In the event of channel exhaustion, it is the
"oldest" play of the sound with the highest resource number that gets stopped
first.

@sound_effect <n> 3 (or 4) stops all plays of sound <n>.

The original Standard 1.0 + Blorb 1.1 behaviour is equivalent to the new
scheme with one channel each of effects and music.


New opcode summary:
-------------------
St Br Opcode Hex V   Inform name and syntax
*     2OP:29 1D  1/* xor a b -> (result)
*     EXT:0  0   5/* save table bytes name prompt -> (result)
*     EXT:1  1   5/* restore table bytes name prompt -> (result)
*     EXT:4  4   6/- set_font font window -> (result)
      EXT:13 D   5/* set_true_colour foreground background
                 6/* set_true_colour foreground background window
   *  EXT:14 E   5/* sound_data sound-number array ?(label)
*     EXT:29 1D  6/* buffer_screen mode -> (result)

set_true_colour is not a good candidate for taking a 2OP encoding like
set_colour, as it will have a low usage frequency, and it will rarely take
small constants.
